# Cos'e' la neuroscience
lo studio di come le funzioni del cervello possono produrre pensieri e idee 
### localizationism
Innate faculties  of the brain  are localized in **SPECIFIC** regions of the cerebral cortex 
### aggregate field theory
 the whole brain participates in behavior



C'e' stato un lungo dibattito su quale delle due teorie fosse vera
- Korbinian Brodmann
Ha dimostrato che  different regions of the brain are made of different neurons Used tissue stains that permitted him to visualize the different cell types in different brain regions Characterized 52 distinct regions
- Camillo Golgi
Ha inventato The silver method for staining neurons. Stain permits visualization of individual neurons in their entirety
- Cajal
Ha identificato la natura UNITARIA dei neuroni: the nervous system is made up of individual cells. Neurons are discrete entities.
Ha anche compreso due principi di organizzazione dei neuroni:
**Principle of dynamic polarization**: electrical signals within a nerve cell flow only in one direction: from the receiving sites of the neuron, to its trigger region.
**Principle of connectional specificity**: nerve cells do not connect randomly with one another in the formation of networks. Rather, each cell makes specific connections—at particular contact points— with certain postsynaptic target cells but not with others.
- Charles Sherrington
Conia il termine sinapsi

Risposta alla lotta tra localizationism e aggregate field theory: The knowledge of the parts (the neurons and brain structures) must be understood in conjunction with the whole (i.e., what the parts make when they come together: the mind)

- Wilder Penfield
He invented the Montreal procedure to treat epylepsy:
He surgically destroyed the neurons in the brain that produced the seizures. How did he know who were the neurons that produced these seuizures?He stimulated various parts of the brain with electrical probes and observed the results on the patients, to determine which cells to destroy
**From these observations, he created maps of the sensory and motor cortices in the brain**
- Donald O. Hebb
cells that fire together, wire together


Associationism: individual experiences are associated to produce learning
Behaviorism: only observable behavior can be studied. All talk of mental processes, which cannot be publicly observed, should be avoided.