# Proceduralismo
Spesso in tanti campi, come la matematica e la fisica, ci sono delle nozioni, dei concetti, che vengono dati per *veri*, di cui non si fornisce quindi una *dimostrazione*, in quanto sono assunzioni da cui partono poi ragionamenti e dimostrazioni. Come in filosofia, dove si ha che certe *basic moral views* sono date per vere, senza un ragionamento dietro.
A certi filosofi questo approccio non piace. Questi sono i **proceduralisti** e pensano che si possa fornire un ragionamento per queste *basic moral views* invece di darle per vere da subito. Questo si puo' fare tramite una procedura che distingua il *giusto* dallo *sbagliato*. Le *moral views* corrette sono quelle che **emergono** da una *procedura corretta*.

Il proceduralismo dice che non si puo' iniziare un discorso morale dicendo come premessa che *la schiavitu'* e' sbagliata e la *generosita'* e' giusta. Non c'e' da fare nessun tipo di *moral assumption* a questo stage iniziale. C'e' invece da seguire la procedura corretta e vedere a che outcome si arriva. Se hai scelto la procedura corretta, arriverai alla giusta risposta data la *domanda morale posta*.
**NOTA** che la **golden rule**, cosi' come il **principio di UNIVERSALITA' di KANT** e  il **CONSEQUENTIALISM** fanno parte del *PROCEDURALISMO*. Perche' sono tutte filosofie in cui cio' che e' morale o immorale viene determinato SOLO **DOPO** AVER SEGUITO UNA SERIE DI STEPS, di passaggi, che ne determinano la moralita'. 
Queste visioni **NON danno per vero** che la schiavitu' sia sbagliata, sia immorale, ma promettono di spiegarci e giustificare il motivo per cui questa e' immorale. 
1. Nel caso della golden rule perche' *non ci piacerebbe se la schiavitu' fosse perpetrata su di noi*
2. nel caso del proceduralismo perche' *nessuna optimific social rule permetterebbe la schiavitu'*
3. nel caso di Kant perche' *nessun maxim universalizzabile permetterebbe la schiavitu'*
Una delle branchie piu' famose del *proceduralismo* e' il *social contract theory* anche conosciuto come **contractarianism**, in cui la moralita' e' legata e determinata da *contratti sociali*.

# Contractarianism
In questa corrente filosofica ho *proceduralismo* nel senso che quando si cerca di capire quali standards sono morali, i *contractarians* chiedono di immaginare un gruppo di persone libere, uguali e razionali, che cercano di trovare dei termini di cooperazione che tutti in quel gruppo possano accettare. Le regole che scelgono per governare le loro vite insieme sono le **regole morali**. Quindi diciamo che nulla e' dato per morale o immorale come assunzione, ma per dire che una cosa e' morale c'e' da seguire la procedura descritta qua sopra.

We are all by nature largely, or entirely, **self-interested.** What we want is **power** over others, physical security, plenty of money, and sensual pleasure. Our deepest goal is to **lord it over everyone else**.  This points to an obvious problem. Everyone wants to be at the top of the heap, and only a few can make it there. Further, no one wants to be a patsy, the person who gets stepped on as others climb the ladder of success. We each want to be **Number One**. But we know that the chances of making it are slim, and we want to avoid being trampled as others claw their way to the top. *So what do we do?*

If we are rational, we will each agree to curb our self-interest and **cooperate with one another**. 
* We'll do this *CONDITIONALLY* that is, **on the condition that others do so as well.**
Partendo dall'assunzione che siamo tutti motivati da *self-interest*, e che e' razionale esserlo, *contractarianism* ci dice che  facciamo il massimo per noi stessi quando ci accordiamo nel limitare l'impulso del *self-interest*, che caratterizza ogni persona, e accettiamo un affare che poi ci porta a vivere una vita sicuramente piu' decente. (immagina se tutti mettessero in primo posto il *self-interest* e non si piegassero a  nessun tipo di contratto sociale).

That everyone gets such a life means that we give up the chance of an absolutely fabulous life. But we also protect ourselves from a really terrible one, a life in which we are in the thick of a cutthroat competition, vulnerable to the attacks of everyone around us. That is a deal worth making. Here's why.


## The Prisoner's Dilemma
Tutte le situazioni in cui si compete per una scarsa risorsa, seguendo solo il proprio *self-interest*, quindi NON tenendo in considerazione che si potrebbe ottenere un migliore *outcome*  cooperando con l'altro , rinunciando quindi di poco al proprio *self-interest*, sono conosciute come **prisioner's dilemma**.
Ovviamente nel Prisioner's Dilemma ho che se entrambi sono giocatori razionali, si arriva all'outcome in cui entrambi **confessano**, che non e' ottimale (se avessero cooperato e si fossero fidati dell'altro, avrebbero potuto ottenere un numero di anni di galera molto minore:  *(2,2) invece di (4,4)*). Sto prisioner's dilemma avviene sempre anche nella vita reale: DEFECTO perche' so che l'altro DEFECTERA' (o addirittura ha gia' DEFECTATO), come nel caso del dooping nel mondo degli atleti, in cui sapendo che gli altri potrebbero dooparsi, posso competere con loro SOLO se mi doopo anche io.

## Cooperation and the state of nature
Englishman Thomas Hobbes (1588-1679), the founder of modern contractarianism, was especially concerned with one sort of prisoner's dilemma. He invited the readers of his magnum opus, Leviathan, to imagine a situation in which there was no government, no central authority, no group with the exclusive power to enforce its will on others. He called this situation the state of nature. And he thought it was the worst place you could ever be.In his words, the state of nature is a ((war of all against all, in which the life of man is solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short:' People ruthlessly compete with one another for whatever goods are available. Cooperation is a sham, and trust is non -existent.

The Hobbesian state of nature is a prisoner's dilemma. By seeking to maximize self-interest, everyone is going to be worse off. In such dire circumstances, everyone is competing to gain as much as he can, at the expense of others. With so much at stake, an all-out competition is bound to be very bad for almost everyone. No one is so smart or strong or well connected as to be free from danger.

There is an escape from the state of nature, and the exit strategy is the same for all prisoner's dilemmas. We need two things: 
1. beneficial rules that require cooperation and punish betrayal
2. an enforcer who ensures that these rules are obeyed.
The rules are the terms of the social contract.
They require us to give up the freedom to attack and to kill others, to cheat them and lie to them, to beat and threaten them and take from them whatever we can. In exchange for giving up these freedoms (and others),**we gain the many advantages of cooperation.**

It is rational to give up some of your freedom, provided that you stand a good chance of getting something even better in return. The peace and stability of a well-ordered society is worth it. That is the promise of the social contract.
But you need more than good rules of cooperation to escape from a prisoner's dilemma. You also need a way to make sure the rules are kept. The state of nature comes to an end when people agree with one another to give up their unlimited freedoms and to cooperate on terms that are beneficial to all. The problem with agreements, though, **is that they can be broken.** And without a strong incentive to keep their promises, people in prisoner's dilemmas are going to break them. 
What's needed is a powerful person (or group) whose threats give everyone excellent reason to keep their word. The central power doesn't have to be a government it could be a mob boss, who threatens Al and Bob with death if they were to break their silence. It could be the International Olympic Committee, with the power to suspend or disqualify athletes who test positive for illegal substances. But in the most general case, in which we are faced with anarchy and are trying to escape from utter lawlessness, what we need is a government to enforce basic rules of cooperation.

## VANTAGGI del Contractarianism
1. **Morality Is Essentially a Social Phenomenon**: praticamente non si e' soggetti a giudizio morale quando si e' da soli. La moralita' entra in gioco solo quando si riferisce a qualcun altro, a un gruppo di persone, perche' la moralita' e' legata a **cooperazione**. Quindi se ad esempio divento un tossico, e quindi rovino il mio potenziale (magari ero bravo in qualcosa), allora NON c'e' nessun tipo di giudizio morale che dice che cio' che ho fatto e' moralmente sbagliato. Sono sicuramente imprudente ma non immorale.
2. **Contractarianism Explains and Justifies the Content of the Basic Moral Rules**: questa filosofia spiega e giustidica le basic moral rules. When trying to figure out which standards are genuinely moral ones, contractarians ask us to imagine a group of free, equal, and rational people who are seeking terms of cooperation that each could reasonably accept. The rules they select to govern their lives together are the moral rules. E queste matcheranno di molto le *basic moral rules* che gia' conosciamo. Jhon Rawls addirittura propose un altro test per generare *moral rules*, che e' molto simile a quello dei contractarianisms visto fin'ora. In his Theory of Justice, 1 by most accounts the most important work of political philosophy written in the last century, Rawls has us envision contractors behind a veil of ignorance. This is an imaginary device that erases all knowledge of your distinctive traits. Those behind the veil know that they have certain basic human needs and wants, but they know nothing of their religious identity, their ethnicity, their social or economic status, their sex, or their moral character. The idea is to put everyone on an equal footing, so that the choices they make are completely fair. When placed behind a veil of ignorance, or in some other condition of equality and freedom, what social rules will rational people select? These will almost certainly include p**rohibitions of killing, rape, battery, theft, and fraud**, and rules that require keeping one's word, returning what one owes, and being respectful of others. Contractarianism thus easily accounts for why the **central moral rules** (che sarebbero appunto le basic moral rules) are what they are rational, selfinterested people, free of coercion, would agree to obey them, so long as others are willing to obey them, too.
3. **Contractarianism Offers a Method for Justifying Every Moral Rule**: praticamente e' possibile dare un motivo per cui una azione e' **morale** o  no, come gia visto. Infatti Contractarians have a method for seeing whether certain actions are right or wrong. They invite us to think about whether free, equal, and rational people would agree to live by rules that allow the action in question. Contractarians do not assume that the standard moral evils are bad; rather, they show why they are bad, by showing that rational contractors, getting together to select mutually beneficial rules of cooperation, would forbid such behavior. Contractarians offer a method for justifying every single moral rule.
4. **Contractarianism Explains the Objectivity of Morality**: contractarians have an answer to a perennial challenge: If morality isn't a human creation, where did it come from? If contractarianism is correct, morality does not come from God. Nor does it come from human opinion. Rather, **morality is the set of rules that would be agreed to by people who are very like us, only more rational and wholly free, and who are selecting terms of cooperation that will benefit each and every one of them.** Thus contractarians don't have to picture moral rules as eternally true. And they can deny that moral rules are just like the rules of logic, or of natural science other areas where we acknowledge the existence of objective truths. The moral rules are the outcomes of rational choice, tailored to the specifics of human nature and the typical situations that humans find themselves in.
5. **Contractarianism Explains Why It Is Sometimes Acceptable to Break the Moral Rules**: Moral rules are designed for cooperative living. But when cooperation collapses, the entire point of morality disappears. When things become so bad that the state of nature approaches, or has been reached, then the ordinary moral rules lose their force.. Quindi in casi in cui ho la state of nature allora posso non seguire le moral rules praticamente. The basis of morality is cooperation. And that requires trust. When that trust is gone, you are effectively in a state of nature. The moral rules don't apply there, because the basic requirement of moral life that each person be willing to cooperate on fair terms that benefit everyone is not met.
6. **Contractarianism Justifies a Basic Moral Duty to Obey the Law**: quindi ha un modo per giustificare il fatto che seguire la legge e' un dovere da contemplare. We are usually, on contractarian grounds, morally required to obey the law. The law enables us to escape from the state of nature, and so to gain all of the good things that come from a stable, peaceful society. And the benefits are real. We can securely purchase items online, safely walk the streets, trust the mail service, and rely on legal contracts that we've entered, only because most people involved in these activities honor the rules that benefit everyone.**You have a role to play here.** Your obedience to the law helps to support the **institutions that make so many benefits possible.** Those who break the law are undermining these highly beneficial institutions. They are also taking unfair advantage of the sacrifices made by their fellow citizens. That is immoral. Therefore, we all have a basic moral duty to obey the law.
7. **The Contractarian Justification of Legal Punishment**: If punishment fails to deter crime, then the state cannot effectively serve its enforcer role, and so its ultimate justification is undercut. To achieve its aim of keeping the peace, the state's threats for lawbreaking have to be credible. To be credible, they must usually be carried out. And so, when people break the law, they need to be punished. That is the only way we can avoid falling into a state of nature
8. **ContractarianismJustifies the State's Role in Criminal Law**: perche' abbiamo una criminal law? Perche' lo stato NON ha solo la civil law? Perche' allo stato spetta anche quest altra cosa? The state's ultimate purpose is to aid our escape from the state of nature. This gives it special authority to determine who is posing a threat to social stability. The actions that are most dangerous to society treason, assassination, hijacking, attacking government agencies are prohibited by the criminal law. That makes perfect sense, given the different purposes of the criminal and civil law. The function of the civil law is to repair personal harms and wrongs; the function of the criminal law is to preserve the state, and all of the ad vantages it provides. 
9. **Contractarianism and Civil Disobedience**: si dice qua che e' giusto nel contractarianism che ci sia disobbedienza (protesta), nel caso in cui le leggi siano IMMORALI e UNFAIR. What if the laws are unjust, and fail to set out fair terms of cooperation? What if the ideal social code and a society's actual laws are miles apart? In that case, the social contract theorist can explain why breaking the law (under certain circumstances) can be morally acceptable. Governments must earn the allegiance of their citizens. They do this by making their citizens much better off than they would be in a state of nature. That is why it is rational for people to agree to be governed. But when whole classes of people are enslaved or discriminated against, then the government has lost its moral authority over them. **And that seriously weakens** the moral duty to obey the government's laws. Indeed, this means that it is sometimes appropriate to disobey the laws. 
		Tanti hanno provato negli anni a opporsi a leggi ingiuste (basta pensare a Ghandi o a Martin Luter King). In acting as they did, the non-violent protesters were showing a respect for the rule of law. This sounds paradoxical, but their message was clear. They tried to change the law because it was deeply unfair. They didn't want to replace it with anarchy, but rather with a system of real legal justice. They recognized the great value of a society under law under just law. When there is no choice but to remain oppressed, resort to violence, or opt for peaceful and open resistance to injustice, the social contract theory favors the latter course.