What sort of person should I be? An answer to that question provides some of the most vital information you can ever have. And yet none of the ethical theories we have examined thus far does much to address it. Each will say: You ought to be the sort of person who ... maximizes happiness, or treats others with respect, or adheres to rules that free and equal people would endorse, or honors absolute rules. That's a pretty thin sort of answer.

To see what might be missing, consider what we might say of a police officer who obeys the law, but only reluctantly. He always does the minimum required of him. If he could get away with it, he would extort money from business owners on his beat, brutalize prisoners, and doctor evidence. He doesn't actually do any of these things. But that's only because he's afraid of what would happen if he were caught. If we focus just on what the officer has or hasn't done, we will be missing a large part of the ethical picture. To fill things out, we must consider the kind of character he has. It's not a good one. We don't admire such a person; we don't want our children growing up like him. He is lazy, abusive, and untrustworthy, even if his conduct is satisfactory. If we think only about whether he has done his duty, there is nothing to criticize him for. But that just shows that we need to broaden our thinking. We should focus less on matters of moral duty, and concentrate much more on ideals of character. Following that advice leads us directly to a consideration of virtue ethics.

All of the moral theories we have reviewed thus far share a common assumption: that the moral philosopher's primary task is to define the nature of our moral duty. On this view, What should I do? is the crucial moral
question. Once we have an answer to that, I can know what sort of person I should be namely, the sort who will do my duty as reliably as possible

But what if we approached ethics from a different starting point? What if we began by considering what makes for a desirable human life, examining the conditions and the character traits needed to flourish?
Rather than begin with a theory of moral duty, we would start with a picture of the good life and the good person, and define our duty by reference to these ideals. That is precisely what virtue ethics recommends. 
Virtue ethics is not a single theory, but rather a family of theories that can trace its history (in the West) to the philosophy of the ancient Greeks. Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics, written about 2,400 years ago, has had the greatest influence in this tradition and remains a primary inspiration for most who work in it. Aristotle's book develops most of the major themes that even today define the virtue ethical approach to the moral life. Let's consider some of the most important of these themes.

# The Standard of Right Action
Virtue ethics insists that we understand right action by reference to what a virtuous person would characteristically do. In maniera piu formale
```
An act is morally right just because it is one that a virtuous person, acting in character, would do in that situation.
```
Virtue ethics is actually a form of ethical pluralism. Though there is a single ultimate standard do what the virtuous person would dothere are many cases where this advice is too general to be of use. At such times we need a set of more specific moral rules. Virtue ethics can provide  these, too. **For each virtue, there is a rule that tells us to act accordingly**
When these rules conflict, how do we know what to do? We should follow the lead of the virtuous person..
# Moral Complexity
Many moral philosophers have hoped to identify a simple rule, or a precise method, that could tell us exactly what our moral duty is in each situation.  Virtue ethicists reject the idea that there is any simple formula for determining how to act. At the beginning of the Nicomachean Ethics, Aristotle cautions that we must not expect the same degree of precision in all areas of study, and implies that morality lacks rules and methods of thinking that are as precise as those, say, in mathematics. . When it comes to morality, we must be content with general principles that allow for exceptions. Virtue ethicists have followed Aristotle in this thought. To them, ethics is a complex, messy area of decision-making, one that requires emotional maturity and sound judgment

Morality is not like geometry or civil engineering. We have moral rules of thumb that can help us in most situations. But strict obedience to such rules is bound to lead us into error. And the rules, of course, will sometimes conflict. What we need in all cases is a kind of sensitivity. It is something very different from a rote application of preset rules

**NOTA** Morality may be an imprecise discipline, but that does not mean that each person's moral views are as plausible as another's. Aristotle and most of his followers believe in objective standards of morality (those that are true independently of personal feelings or opinions).

# Moral Understanding
As virtue ethicists see things, moral understanding is not just a matter of knowing a bunch of moral facts. If it were, then a child prodigy might be one of the morally wisest among us. **Moral understanding is a species of practical wisdom.**
Such knowledge does require an understanding of certain facts, but it is much more than that. Moral wisdom is a kind of know-how that requires a lot of training and experience. What it doesn't require is a superior IQ or a vast reading list.
One way to reinforce this idea is to appreciate the crucial roles that emotions play in moral understanding. There are three that are especially important
1. ***Emotions can help us to see what is morally relevant, by tipping us off to what matters in a given situation**.*: It's no use knowing that you ought to aid those in need if you always walk around with blinders on, never aware of the struggles or potential discomfort of others. The person with the virtues of compassion, sympathy, and kindness will see things that others miss. Our emotions, when they are well trained, reliably alert us to the morally important features of our lives
2. ***Emotions can also help to tell us what is right and wrong*:** If we are virtuous, the anxiety we feel when considering certain actions is excellent evidence that these actions are immoral. We often feel that certain paths are simply off limits, or that other things definitely must be done, before we have a good intellectual account of why this is so. That a good man feels proud of his actions is reason to think that he has done well. His anger is a reliable indicator that someone has done wrong.
3. **Emotions also help to motivate us to do the right thing.**: They support and reinforce our thoughts about what we ought to do. **Knowing the right course of action is one thing; following through is another.** Unlike a weak-willed person or someone who manages to control her inappropriate impulses, the morally wise person wholeheartedly does what is right. She is relatively free of inner conflict and takes pleasure in doing the right thing.
The moral virtues, which all require moral wisdom, therefore also require a combination of intellectual and emotional maturity. 

# Moral Education
Virtue ethicists, again following Aristotle, believe that moral understanding can be gained only through training, experience, and practice. True, some people are by nature kinder or more generous than others. Yet an impulse in these directions is not enough. Without wisdom, these traits will only occasionally lead to appropriate action. We shouldn't always give to others or tend to their needs. They may be engaged in evil projects. They may need tough love, rather than indulgence. The wise person will know when to give, and when to withhold. So virtue is not inborn. It takes time to acquire. And it also takes the right sort of environment and teachers. Indeed, Aristotle thought that whether we are virtuous or not is partly a matter of moralluck.3 Our upbringing plays a crucial role in whether we are able to become virtuous, and we obviously cannot control the environment we are raised in. If we are lucky, we will have wise and caring parents and teachers to guide us on the path of virtue. But many are not so fortunate. Those who grow up in a corrupt society with terrible role models may (through no fault of their own) lack the opportunity to develop virtues. The most important elements of moral education occur in our youth so much so that Aristotle doubted that a person raised in vice could later change his character very significantly. The point of giving children a moral education is straightforward to help them acquire the virtues. C'e' poi tutto un modo di affinare queste virtu' acquisite che ovviamente  iniziano nel bambino come set di regole impartite dai genitori, poi queste regole venogno ovviamente affinate e smussate tramite l'esperienza in modo da sapersi comportare in ogni situazione  (senza seguire alla lettera qeuste regfole insomma ma deviando da esse e capendo quando fare eccezioni).


# The Nature of Virtue
**A virtue is a character trait. It's not a mere habit, or a tendency to act in certain ways. Habits don't define a person; character traits do.**
Virtues require wisdom about what is important, and why. While habits are defined as certain patterns of behavior, virtues require much more. In addition to routinely acting well, the virtuous person also has a distinctive set of **perceptions**, thoughts, and motives.
Let's make this concrete. Consider first the virtue of generosity. A generous person will often have different perceptions from a stingy person. Generous people will see the homeless person on the street, will take note of the shy child in the classroom, will realize that an injured person is having trouble with the door. Stingy people tend to look the other way.
A generous person has different thoughts from those of an ungenerous person. A generous person will think about how to be helpful, will not think only of his own needs, will value being of service, and will believe in the goodness of caring for the less fortunate.
A generous person's motives will differ from those of a stingy person. Generous people are not begrudging of their time, they are moved by the distress of others, and they take pleasure in freely giving what they can to those in need.
We can offer similar accounts of all of the other virtues. Courage, for instance, requires that we correctly perceive various threats or dangers, control our fear in a reasonable way, be moved by a noble end, and act accordingly.
Virtuous people are therefore defined not just by their deeds (le loro azioni, i loro atti), but also by their inner life.

A virtuous person who understands the right thing to do will also be strongly motivated to do it, without regret or reluctance, for all the right reasons. In Aristotle's view, and in the virtue ethical tradition, this is what distinguishes the truly virtuous from the merely **continent**- those who can keep it together, **manage to do the right thing, but with little or no pleasure, and only by suppressing very strong contrary desires.**

# Virtue and the Good Life
Aristotle thought it obvious that all of us seek eudaimonia, which translates as ((happiness;' or ((flourishing:' A life of eudaimonia is an excellent life for the person living it. The happiness Aristotle speaks of is not mere enjoyment. It isn't only a state of mind, but rather a combination of activity and pleasure. Aristotle thought that the good life is an active one filled with wise choices and worthy pursuits. No matter how much pleasure you get from sitting in front of the TV and watching The Simp sons (a lot, in my case), a life devoted to that fails to qualify as a good life. Aristotle was no hedonist.
Aristotle argued that virtue is an essential element in a good life. In this he agreed with his teacher, Plato. Unlike Plato, however, Aristotle did not think that we could be happy on the rack. Virtue does not guarantee a good life; it is necessary, but not sufficient, for our flourishing. Most contemporary virtue ethicists side with Aristotle on this one enough misfortune can damage a life so greatly as to make it, on the whole, an unenviable one. If a virtuous person loses her beloved family to war or disease, or falls prey to nasty rumors, crushing debt, and crippling disability, then no matter how virtuous, she can fail to gain true happiness.
How attractive is a life of virtue? Very. Just think of what we hope and try for when raising our children. We want them to be kind, fair, generous, appropriately self-confident, and wise. We hope that they develop courage, that they know how to be a good friend, that they can sensitively offer comfort to others in need. Each of these is a virtue; a person who manages to have them all is in most ways living an excellent life. True, if Aristotle is correct, having these traits will not guarantee a good life. The admirable nature of a virtuous person may, for instance, attract the envy and hatred of others, who will sometimes make a martyr of a noble soul. But this should not lead us to think that the virtues are unnecessary for a good life. Even if a life of virtue is not a guarantee that you will flourish, a life without virtue is a poor one

SKIPPO LE OBIEZIONI SECONDO ME UN PO' INUTILI DAI