# The opportunities and risks of AI for society 

## Cosa possiamo diventare?
AI may enable self-realisation, by which we mean the ability for people to flourish in terms of their own characteristics, interests, potential abilities or skills, aspirations, and life projects. Much as inventions, such as the washing machine, liberated people – particularly women – from the drudgery of domestic work, the “smart” automation of other mundane aspects of life may free up yet more time for cultural, intellectual and social pursuits, and more interesting and rewarding work. **More AI may easily mean more human life spent more intelligently**.

The risk in this case **is not** the obsolescence of some old skills and the emergence of new ones per se, but **the pace (la velocita'/ il ritmo) at which this is happening** and the unequal distributions of the costs and benefits that result.

A very fast devaluation of old skills and hence a quick disruption of the job market and the nature of employment can be seen at the level of both the individual and society. 
1. At the level of the individual, jobs are often intimately linked to personal identity, self-esteem, and social role or standing, all factors that may be adversely affected by **redundancy**, even putting to one side the potential for** severe economic harm**.
2. Furthermore, at the level of society, the deskilling in sensitive, **skill-intensive domains**, (causa insorgenza di AI che fanno il lavoro al posto nostro, tipo del medico) such as health care diagnosis or aviation, may create **dangerous vulnerabilities** in the event of AI malfunction or an adversarial attack.

**Fostering** the development of AI in support of new abilities and skills, while **anticipating** and mitigating its impact on old ones will require both close study and potentially radical ideas, such as the proposal for some form of **“universal basic income”** (l'assenza di lavori in maniera brusca inzialmente dovra' essere appianata da un income fisso di base per ogni persona), which is growing in popularity and experimental use.

In the end, we need some intergenerational solidarity between those disadvantaged today and those advantaged tomorrow, to ensure that the disruptive transition between the present and the future will be as fair as possible, for everyone.

Il rischio di impiegare l'AI in questo caso e' quindi per ricapitolare che l abilita' umana  di svolgere certe mansioni venga svalutata/rimpiazzata dall'AI. Questo rischia di portare a un sacco di problemi se questo cambiamento avviene in maniera brusca, senza misure per combattere le problematiche che si presenterebbero.

## Cosa possiamo fare?
PRIMA COSA: definition of *human agency*: **an individual's capacity to determine and make meaning from their environment through purposive consciousness and reflective and creative action**

AI is providing a growing reservoir of “smart agency”. Put at the service of human intelligence, such a resource can hugely enhance human agency. We can do more, better, and faster, thanks to the support provided by AI.

Responsibility is therefore essential, in view of what sort of AI we develop, how we use it, and whether we share with everyone its advantages and benefits. Obviously, the corresponding risk is the absence of such responsibility. This may happen not just because we have the wrong socio-political framework, but also because of a “black box” mentality, according to which AI systems for decision-making are seen as being beyond human understanding, and hence **beyond control**.
(cioe' la responsabilita' non deve essere delegata completamente alla AI ma deve rimanere una responsabilita' legata anche alla persona che utilizza la AI, che magari NON si deve fidare ciecamente di cio' che la AI le dice).

## Cosa possiamo ottenere?
Artificial intelligence offers myriad opportunities for improving and augmenting the capabilities of individuals and society at large. Whether by preventing and curing diseases or optimising transportation and logistics, the use of AI technologies presents countless possibilities for reinventing society by radically enhancing what humans are collectively capable of. More AI may support better coordination, and hence more ambitious goals. Human intelligence augmented by AI could find new solutions to old and new problems, from a fairer or more efficient distribution of resources to a more sustainable approach to consumption. Precisely because such technologies have the potential to be so powerful and disruptive, they also introduce proportionate risks.

Increasingly, we may not need to be either ‘in or on the loop’ (that is, as part of the process or at least in control of it), if we can delegate our tasks to AI. However, if we rely on the use of AI technologies to augment our own abilities in the wrong way, we may delegate important tasks and above all decisions to autonomous systems that should remain at least partly subject to human supervision and choice.

This in turn may reduce our ability to monitor the performance of these systems (by no longer being ‘on the loop’ either) or preventing or redressing errors or harms that arise (‘post loop’). It is also possible that these potential harms may accumulate and become entrenched, as more and more functions are delegated to artificial systems. It is therefore imperative to strike a balance between pursuing the ambitious opportunities offered by AI to improve human life and what we can achieve, on the one hand, and, on the other hand, ensuring that we remain in control of these major developments and their effects.

## Come possiamo interagire?
From climate change and antimicrobial resistance to nuclear proliferation and fundamentalism, global problems increasingly have high degrees of coordination complexity, meaning that they can be tackled successfully only if all stakeholders codesign and co-own the solutions and cooperate to bring them about. AI, with its dataintensive, algorithmic-driven solutions, can hugely help to deal with such coordination complexity, supporting more societal cohesion and collaboration. For example, efforts to tackle climate change have exposed the challenge of creating a cohesive response, both within societies and between them. The scale of this challenge is such that we may soon need to decide between engineering the climate directly and designing societal frameworks to encourage a drastic cut in harmful emissions.
This latter option might be undergirded by an algorithmic system to cultivate societal cohesion. Such a system would not be imposed from the outside; it would be the result of a self-imposed choice.
Yet the risk is that AI systems may erode human selfdetermination, as they may lead to unplanned and unwelcome changes in human behaviours to accommodate the routines that make automation work and people’s lives easier.  AI’s predictive power and relentless nudging, even if unintentional, should be at the service of human selfdetermination and foster societal cohesion, not undermining of human dignity or human flourishing

# The dual advantage of an ethical approach to AI
. Adopting an ethical approach to AI confers what we define here as a “dual advantage”.
1. On one side, ethics enables organisations to take advantage of the social value that AI enables. This is the advantage of being able to identify and leverage new opportunities that are socially acceptable or preferable. 
2. On the other side, ethics enables organisations to anticipate and avoid or at least minimise costly mistakes.

Ethics’ dual advantage can only function in an environment of public trust and clear responsibilities more broadly. Public acceptance and adoption of AI technologies will occur only if the benefits are seen as meaningful and risks as potential, yet preventable, minimisable, or at least something against which one can be protected, through risk management (e.g. insurance) or redressing.

# A Unied Framework of Five Principles for AI in Society
Gia' schematizzato. LOL
# Recommendations for a GOOD AI society

There are four kinds of Action Points: to assess, to develop, to incentivise and to support.

Different cultural frameworks inform attitudes to new technology. This document represents a European approach, which is meant to be complementary to other approaches. We are committed to the development of AI technology in a way that **secures people’s trust, serves the public interest, and strengthens shared social responsibility.**

TUTTI I PUNTI LI SKIPPO, vediteli te sono carini ma non mi ricorderei nulla