Non abbiamo una definizione chiara per la 'morality'.
# Conventional and Critical Morality
Suppose you take a sociology or an anthropology course, and you get to a unit on the morality of the cultures you’ve been studying. You’ll likely focus on the patterns of behavior to be found in the cultures, their accepted ideas about right and wrong, and the sorts of character traits that these cultures find admirable. These are the elements of what we can call conventional morality—**the system of widely accepted rules and principles, created by and for human beings**, that members of a **culture** or **society** use to **govern their own lives and to assess the actions and the motivations of others**. The elements of conventional morality can be known by any astute social observer, since gaining such knowledge is a matter of appreciating what most people in a society or culture actually take to be right or wrong. 

**Conventional morality can differ from society to society**:
1. The conventional morality of Saudi Arabia forbids women from publicly contradicting their husbands or brothers, while Denmark’s conventional morality allows this.
2. People in the United States would think it immoral to leave a restaurant without tipping a good waiter or bartender, while such behavior in many other societies is perfectly OK.

When I write about morality in this book, I  am not referring to conventional morality. I  am assuming that some social standards— even those that are long-standing and very popular—can be morally mistaken. (We’ll examine this assumption in Chapter 3.B.) After all, the set of traditional principles that are widely shared within a culture or society are the result of human decisions, agreements, and practices, all of which are sometimes based on misunderstandings, irrationality, bias, or superstition

Most of us assume, as I will do, that the popularity of a moral view is not a guarantee of its truth.

If so, then there may be some independent, **critical morality** that 
1. Does not have its origin in social agreements
2. Is untainted by mistaken beliefs, irrationality, or popular prejudices
3. Can serve as the true standard for determining when conventional morality has got it right and when it has fallen into error. That is the morality whose nature we are going to explore in this book.

# The Branches of Moral Philosophy
1. **Value theory**: What is the good life? What is worth pursuing for its own sake? How do we improve our lot in life? What is happiness, and is it the very same thing as well-being (e' la stessa cosa dello stare bene/del benessere?)?
2. **Normative ethics**: What are our fundamental moral duties? What makes right actions right? Which character traits count as virtues, which as vices, and why? Who should our role models be? Do the ends always justify the means, or are there certain types of action that should never be done under any circumstances?
3. **Metaethics**: What is the status of moral claims and advice? Can ethical theories, moral principles, or specific moral verdicts be true? If so, what makes them true? Can we gain moral wisdom? If so, how? Do we always have good reason to do our moral duty?

# Moral Starting Points
Some skeptics about morality deny that there are any proper starting points for ethical reflection. They believe that moral reasoning is simply a way of rationalizing our **biases** and **gut feelings**. 
This outlook encourages us to be lax in moral argument and, worse, supports C. Moral Starting Points 5 an attitude that no moral views are any better than others. While this sort of skepticism might be true, we shouldn’t regard it as the default view of ethics. We should accept it only as a last resort.
In the meantime, let’s consider some fairly plausible ethical assumptions, **claims that can get us started in our moral thinking**:
1. *Neither the law nor tradition is immune from moral criticism*: The law does not have the final word on what is right and wrong. Neither does tradition. **Actions that are legal, or customary, are sometimes morally mistaken**.
2. *Everyone is morally fallible*: Everyone has some mistaken ethical views, and no human being is wholly wise when it comes to moral matters.
3. *Friendship is valuable*: Having friends is a good thing. Friendships add value to your life. You are better off when there are people you care deeply about, and who care deeply about you.
4. *We are not obligated to do the impossible*: Morality can demand only so much of us. Moral standards that are impossible to meet are illegitimate. Morality must respect our limitations.
5. *Children bear less moral responsibility than adults*
6. *Justice is a very important moral good.* Any moral theory that treats justice as irrelevant is deeply suspect. It is important that we get what we deserve, and that we are treated fairly
7. *Deliberately hurting other people requires justification.*  The default position in ethics is this: do no harm. It is sometimes morally acceptable to harm others, but there must be an excellent reason for doing so or else the harmful behavior is unjustified.
8. *Equals ought to be treated equally*: People who are alike in all relevant respects should get similar treatment. When this fails to happen—when racist or sexist policies are enacted, for instance—then something has gone wrong.
9. *Self-interest isn’t the only ethical consideration.*: How well-off we are is important. But it isn’t the only thing of moral importance. Morality sometimes calls on us to set aside our own interests for the sake of others
10. *Agony is bad*: Excruciating physical or emotional pain is bad. It may sometimes be appropriate to cause such extreme suffering, but doing so requires a very powerful justification.
11. *Might doesn’t make right*. People in power can get away with lots of things that the rest of us can’t. That doesn’t justify what they do. That a person can escape punishment is one thing—whether his actions are morally acceptable is another.
12. Free and informed requests prevent rights violations. If, with eyes wide open and no one twisting your arm, you ask someone to do something for you, and she does it, then your rights have not been violated— even if you end up hurt as a result

# Morality and Other Normative Systems
We can also better understand morality by contrasting its principles with those of other normative systems. Each of these represents a set of standards for how we ought to behave, ideals to aim for, rules that we should not break

There are many such systems, but let’s restrict our focus to four of the most important of them: 
1. those that govern the law,
2. etiquette, 
3. selfinterest,
4. and tradition. 

 1. The fact that a **law** tells us to do something does not settle the question of whether morality gives its stamp of approval. Some immoral acts (like cheating on a spouse) are not illegal. And some illegal acts (like voicing criticism of a dictator) are not immoral. Certainly, many laws require what morality requires and forbid what morality forbids. But the fit is hardly perfect, and that shows that morality is something different from the law. That a legislature passed a bill is not enough to show that the bill is morally acceptable
 2. We see the same imperfect fit when it comes to standards of etiquette. Forks are supposed to be set to the left of a plate, but it isn’t immoral to set them on the right. Good manners are not the same thing as morally good conduct. Morality sometimes requires us not to be polite or gracious, as when someone threatens your children or happily tells you a racist joke. So the standards of etiquette can depart from those of morality.
 3. The same is true when it comes to the standards of self-interest. Think of all of the people who have gotten ahead in life by betraying others, lying about their past, breaking the rules that others are following. It’s an unhappy thought, but a very commonsensical one: you sometimes can improve your lot in life by acting immorally. And those who behave virtuously are sometimes punished, rather than rewarded, for it. Whistle blowers who reveal a company’s or a government official’s corruption are often attacked for their efforts, sued to the point of bankruptcy, and targeted for their courageous behavior. Though the relation between self-interest and morality is contested, it is a plausible starting point to assume that morality can sometimes require us to sacrifice our well-being, and that we can sometimes improve our lot in life by acting unethically. Unless this is shown to be mistaken—something that would require a lot of complex moral thinking, if it could be done at all—we are right to think that the standards of morality are not the very same as those of self-interest. 
 4. Finally, morality is also distinct from tradition. That a practice has been around a long time does not automatically make it moral. Morality sometimes requires a break with the past, as it did when people called for the abolition of slavery or for allowing women to vote. And some nontraditional, highly innovative practices may be morally excellent. The longevity of a practice is not a foolproof test of its morality.
# Morality and Religion
Because many people look to religion for moral guidance, it is important to understand the relation between morality and religion.
Many people have the following thought: if God does not exist, then morality is a sham. The only legitimate source of morality is God’s commands. On this view, atheism—the belief that God does not exist—spells the doom of morality. The underlying idea seems to be this: because morality is a set of norms (i.e., standards that we ought to live up to), there must be someone with the authority to create them. Without God, there is no one but we human beings to make up the moral law. And we lack the needed authority to do the work. Our say-so doesn’t make things right; our disapproval cannot make things wrong. We are limited in understanding and bound to make mistakes. A morality built upon our imperfections would lack credibility.
This vision of God’s role in morality—as its ultimate author, the one who makes up the moral code—rests on a crucial assumption: that morality must be created by someone. Personal confession: I don’t understand why this assumption is appealing. But that may be just one of my many limitations. In any event, those who do like the view I’ve just sketched will find themselves embracing the Divine Command Theory: `An act is morally required just because it is commanded by God, and immoral just because God forbids it`
I think that this is the natural, default view for a religious believer when thinking of God’s relation to morality. But this view is not without its problems. There are two of them. The first is obvious. The Divine Command Theory makes morality depend on God’s commands. Yet God may not exist. For the moment, though, let’s just assume that God does exist, and see what follows. To appreciate the second problem, imagine the point at which God is choosing a morality for us. God contemplates the nature of rape torture, and treachery. What does He see? Being omniscient (all-knowing), God sees such actions for what they are. Crucially, He sees nothing wrong with them. They are, at this point, morally neutral. Nothing, as yet, is right or wrong. But God did, at some point, make a decision. He forbade rape, theft, and most kinds of killing. If the Divine Command Theory is correct, then He didn’t forbid them because they were immoral.
**Did God have reasons for His decisions, or not?**
If the Divine Command Theory is true, then there is trouble either way. If God lacks reasons for His commands—if there is no solid basis supporting His decisions to prohibit certain things and require others—then God’s decisions are arbitrary. It would be as if God were creating morality by a coin toss. But that is surely implausible. That sort of God would be arbitrary, and thus imperfect. So a perfect God must have had excellent reasons for laying down the moral law as He did.**But then it seems that these reasons, and not God’s commands, are what makes actions right or wrong.** Actions are not right because God commands them. Whatever reasons support God’s choices also explain why actions have the moral status they do.
```
Suppose, for instance, that God really did forbid us from torturing others, and that God had very good reasons for doing so. Although we can’t presume to know God’s thoughts, let’s just assume for now that God based His decision on the fact that torture is extremely painful, humiliating, and an attack on a defenseless person. Assuming that these are the relevant reasons, then these reasons are enough to explain why torture is immoral. Torture is wrong because it is extremely painful, humiliating, and so on
```

This point is expressed by **The Divine Perfection Argument**:
1. If the Divine Command Theory is true, then a morally perfect God could have created a flawless morality that required us to rape, steal, and kill, and forbade us from any acts of kindness or generosity.
2. A morally perfect God could not have issued such commands—anyone who did so would be **morally imperfect**.
 Therefore
 3. The Divine Command Theory is false.
The first premise is certainly true. The Divine Command Theory says that God’s choices wholly determine morality, and that nothing determines God’s choices. And the second premise is highly plausible. A moral code that required such horrific acts, and forbade such good ones, could not be authored by someone worthy of love and worship, someone fit to serve as a model of moral perfection.