E' un processo in cui si dice che `an action is morally required just because it produces the best overall results`.
Economists have coined a special word for this feature—being **optimific**.
Come determino se una cosa e' **OPTIMIFIC**? Posso farlo seguendo questo procendimento:
1. First, identify what is **intrinsically good**—valuable in and of itself, and worth having for its own sake. Familiar candidates include happiness, autonomy, knowledge, and virtue.
2. Next, identify what is **intrinsically bad** (i.e., bad all by itself). Examples might include physical pain, mental anguish, sadistic impulses, and the betrayal of innocents.
3. Then determine **all of your options**. Which actions are open to you at the moment?
4. For each option, **determine the value of its results**. How much of what is intrinsically good will each action bring about? How much of what is intrinsically bad?
5. Finally, pick the action that yields the greatest net balance of good over bad. That is the optimific choice. That is your moral duty. **Doing anything else is immoral.**
Consequentialism isn’t just a single theory, but is rather a family of theories, united by their agreement that results are what matter in ethics. We can’t discuss every member of the family here, so I will restrict my attention, for the most part, to its most prominent version— **act utilitarianism**.

# Act Utilitarianism
According to act utilitarianism, **well-being** is the only thing that is intrinsically valuable.
Thus this view states that an action is morally required if and only **_if it does more to improve overall well-being than any other action you could have done in the circumstances_**.
Philosophers call this ultimate moral standard the **principle of utility**. 
The focus, importantly, is on maximizing the **overall amount of well-being in the world**—not just yours, not just mine, but that of everyone affected by our actions. 
**When we fail to maximize good results**, we act **wrongly**, even if we had the best intentions.
## PROS
1. Utilitarianism is a doctrine of **impartiality**, and this is one of its **great strengths**. It tells us that the welfare of each person is equally morally valuable: **Whether rich or poor, white or black, male or female, religious or not, your well-being is just as important as anyone else’s.**
2. A second attraction is utilitarianism’s ability to **justify our basic moral beliefs**. Consider the things we regard, deep down, as seriously immoral: slavery, rape, humiliating defenseless people, killing innocent victims. Each of these clearly tends to do more harm than good. Utilitarianism **condemns** such acts. So do we. Now consider the things we strongly believe to be morally right: helping the poor, keeping promises, telling the truth, bravely facing danger. Such actions are highly beneficial. Utilitarianism **commends** them. So do we.
3. A third benefit of utilitarianism is its ability to provide advice about how to resolve moral conflicts. **Because it has just a single ultimate rule—maximize well-being—it can offer concrete guidance where it is most needed.**
For utilitarians, no moral rule (other than the principle of utility) is **absolute**. An absolute rule is one that is not to be violated under any conditions. According to utilitarianism, it is morally okay to violate any rule—even one that prohibits cannibalism, or torture, or the killing of innocents—if doing so will raise overall well-being.
4. A fourth benefit of utilitarianism is its insistence that every person is a member of the **moral community**. To be a member of the moral community is to be **important** in your own right. It  is **to be owed a certain amount of respect**. Membership in the moral community imposes a duty on everyone else to take one’s needs seriously, for one’s own sake. Importantly, utilitarians also argue that nonhuman animals are members of the moral community. The reasoning behind their inclusion is recorded in a famous slogan by the pioneering utilitarian Jeremy Bentham (1748–1832): “the question is not, Can they reason? nor, Can they talk? but, Can they suffer?”. According to utilitarians, animals are important in their own right. Just to be clear, utilitarians allow that it is sometimes okay to harm members of the moral community. There are many cases in which maximizing overall well-being comes at a price. For instance, it may be acceptable to conduct certain intensely painful animal experiments, provided that they bring about very beneficial results. The point here is that,**from the utilitarian perspective, we are not allowed to ignore the suffering of others**. It doesn’t matter whether the victims are human beings or not.
## CONS
1. It appears that a consistently utilitarian lifestyle would be one of great and constant self-sacrifice. Anytime you can do more good for others than you can for yourself, you are required to do so.
	`If I have a choice between spending $1,000 on a beach vacation and sending that money to UNICEF (the United Nations Children’s Fund), it’s an easy call. UNICEF literature claims that $1,000 can provide 100 families with a basic water kit for use during emergencies, immunize 1,000 children against polio, or provide enough woolen blankets to cover 250 children during winter-weather emergencies. I’d be unhappy if I had to give up my vacation. But my unhappiness pales in comparison to the suffering of those whose lives could be saved if I spent my money on them, rather than myself. If utilitarianism is correct, then no more vacations for me (or you, probably)`
2. Another worry about utilitarianism, ironically, is its attachment to impartiality. The impartiality required by utilitarianism really is a substantial benefit of the theory. The happiness of a celebrity or a billionaire is no more important than that of a homeless person or a refugee. From the moral point of view, everyone counts equally; no one’s interests are more important than anyone else’s. Yet there is also something worrying about impartiality, since morality sometimes seems to recommend partiality. It seems right, for instance, that I care about my children more than your children, that I care more for friends than strangers, more for my fellow citizens than those living halfway around the world.And it also seems right to translate my care into action.
`If I have saved a bit of money, and it could either pay for my son’s minor surgery or relieve the greater suffering of famine victims, most of us will think it at least permissible to pay the surgeon. But to do that is to be partial to the interests of my son. Utilitarianism does not allow that. It rejects the idea that a person, just because he is my son, my dear friend, or my fellow citizen, is more deserving of my help and attention.`
3. This emphasis on impartiality leads to another problem. We are to count everyone’s wellbeing equally. But suppose that nearly everyone in a society has a deep-seated prejudice against a small minority group. And suppose, further, that they use this prejudice to defend a policy of enslavement. Depending on the circumstances, it could be that utilitarianism requires slavery in this society. When deciding the matter, we must take all of the harms to the slaves into account. B**ut we must also consider the benefits to their oppressors**. **Everyone’s interests count equally. Rich or poor, white or black, male or female.**. 
Perhaps the greatest problem for utilitarianism can be simply put: we must maximize wellbeing, but sometimes we can do this only by committing some serious injustice. Moral theories should not permit, much less require, that we act unjustly. **Therefore, there is something deeply wrong about utilitarianism**.If utilitarianism is correct, then we must minimize harm—even if doing so means letting the guilty escape justice

E' stato quidni sviluppato
**The Argument from Injustice** 
1. The correct moral theory will never require us to commit serious injustices. 
2. Utilitarianism sometimes requires us to commit serious injustices. 
3. Therefore utilitarianism is not the correct moral theory
Gli Utilitarianism hanno provato a rispondere in 4 modi:
1. The first is that justice is also intrinsically valuable. It might sound puzzling, but those who make this first reply accept this argument in every respect. Praticamente dicono che anche la GIUSTIZIA viene presa in considerazione , non solo il wellbeing. Quindi che c'e' un compromess. Ma sta cosa non tiene. What seems right to say is this: sometimes it’s best to prefer well-being to justice, and sometimes not. But without any principle to sort this out, we don’t really have a coherent theory at all
2. In the face of this problem, some utilitarians opt for a second reply, and claim that i**njustice is never optimific**. This amounts to denying premise 2. Pero' si smonta dicendo che ci sono casi in cui l'ingiustizia HA COSI' POCHI LATI NEGATIVI che un utilitarian deve perforza dire che e' optimific.
3. A third reply to the problem of justice denies premise 1 of the Argument from Injustice. Those who offer this reply allow that well-being and justice sometimes conflict. But when they do, it **is justice, and not well-being, that must take a backseat.** Justice is only a part, not the whole, of morality (per loro). Of course it is important to respect people’s rights, but that is because doing so is usually optimific. When it isn’t, rights must be sacrificed. So premise 1 of the Argument from Injustice is false. (CIOE' PRATICAMENTE DICONO CHE UNA CORRECT MORAL THEORY POSSA RICHIEDERE INVECE DI COMMETTERE DELLE INGIUSTIZIE).
		E' vero dai, la giustizia puo' essere sacrificata a volte. MA QUANDO? In quali occasioni? Utilitarians have an answer: whenever the results of doing so are optimific.
4. A fourth reply enables us to develop a closely related moral theory that deserves special mention here, because it promises to handle a number of objections to utilitarianism, while keeping much of its spirit. This is **rule consequentialism**—the view that an action is morally right just because it is required by an **optimific** social rule. An optimific social rule is a rule that meets the following condition: if (nearly) **EVERYONE IN A SOCIETY WERE TO ACCEPT IT**, then the results would be **optimific**.
	The basic idea is this. **Rather than determine an action’s morality by asking about its results, we ask instead about whether the action conforms to a MORAL RULE**. This is a familiar model in ethics. **Most moral theories operate this way. What distinguishes them from one another is their different claims about what makes something a moral rule**
	 The moral rules are the optimific social rules. To know whether a rule is an optimific social rule, follow these three steps:
		 1. Carefully describe the rule
		 2. . Imagine what a society would be like if just about everyone in it endorsed the rule.
		 3. Then ask this question: will that society be better off with this rule than with any competing rule?
	If the answer to this question is yes, then this rule is an optimific social rule. If the answer is no, then it isn’t an optimific social rule, and so is not a genuine moral rule.
	Rule consequentialism will probably instruct professors to give their students the grades they deserve, rather than those they would like to have. It will condemn the actions of thieves, even if they don’t get caught and their victims suffer in only minor ways. It will likely prohibit such practices as vicarious punishment. When we focus on what is optimific as a general policy, we repeatedly get advice that agrees with our notions of justice. Even rule consequentialists who reject the intrinsic value of justice, and insist that well-being is the only thing of ultimate value, will almost always defend policies that are just. SI SONO PARATI IL CULO HAI CAPITO? ora funziona tutto,non c'e' ingiustizia. Rule consequentialism also solves other problems with act utilitarianism. It supports our belief that morality permits a certain degree of partiality, because policies that allow us to give preference to friends, loved ones, and fellow citizens will very often be highly beneficial. Rule consequentialism can also say that certain actions are simply forbidden, even if they will sometimes achieve very good results. For instance, even if it would be optimific here and now to torture a prisoner, there may well be an optimific rule that forbids political torture. . In most cases and over the long run, societies that ban torture may be much better off, in terms of both happiness and justice, than those that allow their officials to torture prisoners. If that is so, then torture is immoral—even if, in unusual cases, it yields real benefits. NONOSTANTE CIO' IN POCHI ACCETTANO LA RULE CONSEQUENTIALISM. The basic worry is simple. Rule consequentialists demand that we obey moral rules, even when we know that breaking them would yield better results. But that is irrational, since in these cases, consequentialists know in advance that their ultimate goal (making the world the best place it can be) will not be fulfilled. . It is irrational to knowingly defeat your own goals. Rule consequentialists do this whenever they issue a recommendation that differs from act utilitarianism. Act utilitarianism demands that we always to do what is optimific. So, by definition, whenever rule consequentialists give us different advice, we are required to act in a way that fails to yield the best results. Rule consequentialists would forbid torture and embezzlement and vicarious punishment—even when pecific instances of such action would be most beneficial. This is self-defeating, since a consequentialist’s ultimate aim is to produce the best possible results. That is why most consequentialists have rejected it.