```
Imagine a person who reasons as follows: I should keep my money rather than pay it out in taxes, because if I keep it, I'll be able to afford a wonderful vacation for myself and my family. And no one is actually going to suffer if I pocket the money, since it's only a few thousand dollars that we're talking about. There's no way that money could bring as much happiness in the government's hands as it could in mine. Suppose he is right about that. He spends the money on his vacation. He and his family have a terrific time. He is never caught. Still, he has done something wrong.
```

Immanuel Kant (1724-1804) remains perhaps the most important voice of opposition to _utilitarianism_,and to its claim that the ultimate point of morality is to improve well-being rather than do justice.

People are inconsistent to the extent that they treat **similar cases differently**.
Our deep opposition to unfairness, and the resulting importance we attach to consistency, are revealed in two very popular tests of morality. Each takes the form of a question:
1. **What if everyone did that?**
2. **How would you like it if I did that to you?**
When we ask such questions in the face of a bully, a liar, or a doublecrosser we are trying to get the person to see that he is _acting unfairly_, _making an exception of himself_, _living by a set of rules that work only because others are not doing what he is doing_.

1. The **FIRST** question  is  *shorthand* for the following test: _**if disastrous results would occur if everyone did X, then X is immoral**_.
	Questo test della **prima domana** pero' a volte **FALLISCE**, e quindi NON si puo' usarlo in maniera universale per determinare la **moralita'** di un'azione. Fallisce ad esempio in questo caso:
	Consider a common argument against homosexual sex: **if everyone did that, disaster would soon follow, for the human race would quickly die out.** (giustamente non si scopa piu' quindi moriremmo tutti). MA l'*omosessualita'* NON e' **immorale**.
2. What about the other test, the one that asks: **How would you like it if I did that to you?** This is a direct application of the **golden rule**, which tells you to **treat others as you would like to be treated**. C'e' pero' un problema con questa regola che e' il seguente: **The golden rule makes morality depend on a person's desires:** `most of us don't like to be hit. And so the golden rule forbids us from hitting others. Good. But what about masochists who enjoy being hit? The golden rule allows them to go around hitting others. That's bad. The morality of hitting people shouldn't depend on whether you like to take a beating every now and then.`
Quindi nessuna delle due domande possono essere utilizzare come test per definire cosa e' morale e cosa NON lo e', perche' in certe situazioni sbagliano.

# The Principle of Universalizability
Kant's aim was to identify the **ultimate principle of morality**, one that would explain the attraction of the *two tests* (quelli di sopra, che comunque parlano di **consistency** e **fairness**, metriche che per Kant erano necessarie per definire cosa e' morale e cosa non lo e') while **correcting** for their shortcomings (quindi per quelle cose che non ci hanno permesso di affermare che quei due tests possono essere utilizzati per discernere il morale dall'immorale).
He thought he had found it in the following standard, the principle of universalizability:
<h3>**An act is morally acceptable if, and only if, its maxim is universalizable.**</h3>
To understand what this means, we need to understand two things: what a maxim is, and what it is for a maxim to be universalizable
## Maxim
<h4>A maxim is simply the principle of action you give yourself when you are about to do something.</h4>
Un **maxim** ha due parti:
1. Dice cosa stai facendo
2. E perche' lo stai facendo
Tu persona decidi il tuo maxim ogni volta.
Kant pensava che **ogni azione avesse un maxim**. Of course we don't always formulate these maxims clearly to ourselves prior to acting, but at some level, whenever we act, we intend to do something, and we have a reason for doing it.
**A maxim is nothing but a record of that intention and its underlying reason**.
Maxims are what we cite when we try to explain to others why we act as we do.
If we lack a maxim, then **we aren't really acting at all**. We could be moving our bodies, as we do when we sneeze or roll across the bed in our sleep. But the absence of a maxim in these cases shows that these are mere bodily movements, rather than genuine actions.

Kant thought that an action's rightness **depends on its maxim**. And this leads directly to a very important point: for Kant, **the morality of our actions HAS NOTHING TO DO with results**, It has everything to do with **our intentions** and **reasons** for **action**, those that are contained in the principles we live by. (Questo e' un grandissimo BEAK con il consequentialism che invece vedeva solo all'outcome di una data azione per poter poi disquisire della moralita' di quell'azione).
`It might be, for instance, that I keep my promises to you because I think it's right to do so. But I might instead keep my promises because I want you to like me so much that you leave your fortune to me in your will. Assume that these different reasons don't change the results of keeping my promises.`
1. The utilitarian thinks that each case of promise keeping is equally good...
2. but since my maxim is different in these cases, Kant thinks that the morality of these actions might be different. It all depends on whether their maxims are **universalizable**
Kant had a deep reason for making the morality of an action depend on its maxim rather than its results: <h3>It is crucial that the morality of our actions depends entirely on **what is within our control**</h3>
I motivi per cui cio' e' cosi importante sono
1. We decide for ourselves what we intend to do and what reasons we endorse for doing it
2. The results of our actions are often out of our hands, and it is unfair to assign credit or blame for things we can't control.
We need a way to sort out the good maxims from the bad. That's where universalizability comes in.

## Universalizability
How can we tell whether a maxim is universalizable? Here is a threepart test:
1. Formulate your maxim clearly: **state what you intend to do**, and **why you intend to do it**.
2. Imagine a world in which **everyone supports and acts on your maxim.**
3. Then ask: **Can the goal of my action be achieved in such a world?**
If the answer to this last question is yes, then the maxim is universalizable, and the action is morally acceptable.
If the answer is no, then the maxim is not universalizable, and the action it calls for is immoral.

The importance, for Kant, is that this *three-part test* serves as the real way to determine whether we are being **consistent and fair**. If our maxim is universalizable, then **we are pursuing actions for reasons that everyone could stand behind.**
We are asking whether our aims could be achieved if everyone shared them.

Consider the tax cheat again. The only reason he can get what he is aiming for (a lovely vacation) is because **enough others are NOT adopting his maxim**.

`Suppose my maxim is: lie to a friend, in order to escape from being hurt. And suppose everyone acts on this maxim. They lie whenever they think that it is necessary to avoid some personal harm. In that situation, no one would trust the promises of others. And without that trust, people could not achieve the goals they are aiming for with their promises. In a world where no one believed the promises of others, I'd never be able to get money from you with my promise. And so the purpose of my promise would be defeated. And so my maxim is not universalizable. I am making an exception of myself, and am treating you unfairly. My action is therefore immoral`

## Moralita' e Razionalita'
Kant claimed that when we act on a maxim that **can't be universalized, we are contradicting ourselves**. We are being inconsistent. We are assuming that it is acceptable to act in a certain way, even though our purposes could not be achieved if others acted in that very same way. <h5>When we make an exception of ourselves, we are acting as if we were more important than anyone else, and going on as if we were exempt from rules that others must obey. But we are not more important than others, and we are not exempt from these requirements.</h5>
It follows that when we behave immorally, we are reasoning badly. We are making mistaken assumptions that we are more important than other people, that the rules applying to them do not apply to us. Those mistakes, and the inconsistent, contradictory reasoning behind them, **show that immoral conduct is irrational.**

C'e' pero' l'esempio dell'**amoralist** che pone delle questioni. L'amoralist e'  someone who believes in right and wrong but doesn't care about morality at all. The amoralist has the same attitude to moral rules as I do to the rules of professional cricket -  yes, they really exist, but they have absolutely no bearing on my life. Obedience to these rules is completely optional. If I am interested in playing the game, then I'll follow the rules. If not, then there is no reason to do so. L'amoralist mi fa dire: come posso io difendere il claim che l'*amoralist* e' **irrazionale**? C'e' infatti un forte claim che spiega perche' l'amoralist e' RAZIONALE in fondo, chiamato l'*Amoralist's Challenge*.
1. People have a reason to do something **ONLY IF doing it will get them what they care about**.
2. Doing their moral duty **sometimes fails to get people what they care about**
3. Therefore, people **sometimes lack any reason to do their moral duty**.
4. If people lack any reason to do their moral duty, then **violating their moral duty can be perfectly rational.**
5. Therefore, it can be **perfectly rational for people to violate their moral duty**
Se questo claim fosse vero, allora verrebbe rifiutato il concetto di Kant che le **azioni immorali** sono sempre **irrazionali** (in questo setting NON sono irrazionali, perche' capita di non fare azioni morali, perche' le azioni morali NON ci porterebbero sempre a raggiungere cio' che piu' ci interessa)

Kant pero' pensava che *ti stai comportando in modo irrazionale, quando vai contro alle tue ragioni piu' grandi/profonde/forti*. E pensava che *when moral reasons apply to a given situation, they are always the strongest reasons.*

Kant admits that the ruthless contract killer, like so many other successful criminals, did, in a sense, reason perfectly well. He followed what Kant called **hypothetical imperatives**. these imperatives (commands) are commands of reason. They command us to do whatever is needed **in order to get WHAT WE CARE ABOUT.**
**Hypothetical imperatives** tell us **how to achieve our goals**. They require us, *on pain of irrationality*, to do certain things, but only because such actions **will get us what we want**.
`For instance, if my goal is to lose twenty pounds (as it often is), then reason requires me to forgo that pint of luscious coffee ice cream. If I want to get that Wall Street job, then reason requires that I line up a good summer internship. Reason demands that I look both ways at a busy intersection if I want to remain alive. These rational commands apply to me because of what I care about. I am irrational if I disregard them or act in a way that violates them`

**NOTA**: 
1. These commands of reason are **precarious**. 
2. Their existence depends entirely on what I want.
3. When my desires change, these rational requirements change or disappear.
Many people think that all rational requirements are like this that they are all hypothetical imperatives. That's precisely what the first premise of the Amoralist's Challenge states: all of our reasons for action depend on what we care about.
Kant saw the implications of this argument very clearly, and knew that he had to challenge that first premise. In his jargon, what we need is to show how there can be such a thing as a **categorical imperative**.
This is also a command of reason. But unlike hypothetical imperatives, categorical imperatives are rational requirements that do not depend on what we care about.
**Categorical imperatives command us to do things whether we want to or not, with the result that if we ignore or disobey them, we are acting contrary to reason (i.e., irrationally)**.

Kant thought that all moral duties are categorical imperatives. They apply to us just because we are rational beings. **We must obey them even if we don't want to, and even if moral obedience gets us nothing that we care about**

One lesson Kant took from his thoughts about the golden rule is that the basic rules of morality do not depend on our desires. If they did, then moral rules would fail to apply to everyone, since our desires can differ from person to person. This would make morality too variable, and make it possible for people to escape from their moral duty just by changing what they want.

If moral duties really are categorical imperatives, then we act rationally when we act morally, and we act irrationally when we act immorally. 
*Is that sort of view defensible?
Can we really justify the claim that it is rational for everyone to act morally even if we know that, for some people, moral conduct will only undermine their goals?*
Kant thought he could do this. Consider his *Argument for the Irrationality of Immorality*:
1. If you are rational, then you are consistent.
2. If you are consistent, then you obey the principle of universalizability
3. If you obey the principle of universalizability, then you act morally.
4. Therefore, if you are rational, then you act morally
5. Therefore, if you act immorally, then you are irrational
Ci concentriamo sul terzo punto. **QUESTO CLAIM E' VERO???** Scopriamolo.

## Assessing the Principle of Universalizability
Unfortunately, the principle of universalizability fails as a general test for the morality of our actions. Look at premise 3 of Kant's Argument for the Irrationality of Immorality. It says that a maxim's universalizability is a guarantee of an action's rightness. **That is false**: we can act on universalizable maxims and **still do wrong**. SI CAPISCE DA QUESTO ESEMPIO che e' FALSE: `when a thief robs a bank in order to gain riches, Kant can show why the robbery is immoral. If everyone acted on the thief's maxim, there would be no money in the bank to steal, and the thief's goal could not be achieved. But what if the criminal had robbed the bank in order to cripple it and put it out of business? If everyone acted that way, then the thief's goal could be achieved. So the principle of universalizability fails to condemn the robbery. And yet such an act is surely wrong.`, 
un altro e' :`The goals of fanatics are ones that can often be met in a world in which everyone shares their aims. Fanatics (such as the lawn fanatic) need not make exceptions of themselves. The murderous aims of any number of groups could easily be achieved in a world in which everyone supported them. Thus fanatics can be consistent in the relevant sense: their guiding principles could be fulfilled if everyone else were to adopt them.`

## Integrity
While utilitarians think of benevolence (the steady commitment to do good for others) as the central moral virtue, Kant touts integrity. Having INTEGRITY (integrita') **is living in harmony with the principles you believe in**. It is the virtue of **consistency**.
Integrity requires that **you resist making an exception of yourself**. It demands that you follow your principles **even when doing so comes at a real cost**.

But integrity is not the only moral virtue, and it isn't even the most important one. The example of the fanatic shows this. We may be absolutely dedicated to our principles, but if those principles are *deeply flawed*, it would be better, morally speaking, for us to have **less** integrity.

Integrity is worthy of our admiration only when it is **tied to morally legitimate principles.**

## Kant on Absolute Moral Duties
Kant never provided an argument for the claim that the moral rules that prohibit such things as lying and killing are absolute (i.e., never permissibly broken)

*Can't moral duties conflict with one another?* It seems, for instance, that there is a duty to avoid hurting people's feelings, a duty not to start a panic, and a duty to protect innocent people from dangerous attackers. It also seems that fulfilling each of these duties will sometimes require us to lie, and that there is a moral duty not to do so. Perhaps none of these is really a moral duty. Or perhaps, implausibly, we'd never need to lie in order to respect these duties. But it's much more likely that these are real duties, and that they really can conflict with one another. **And if that is so, then these duties cannot all be absolute.**

*NOTE*: For Kant, we can't determine whether an act is right or wrong until we know its maxim. And for any given action, there are countless maxims that might support it. After all, we make up our own maxims, and mine may be very different from yours. It follows that there is only one way for Kant to absolutely ban a type of action. And that is to be sure in advance that, of all the hundreds or thousands of maxims that might support an action, **none of them is universalizable.**

Contrary to Kant's personal view, we don't have to regard all (or perhaps any) moral duties as absolute