Come ho gia visto in un paper precedente di AI4PEOPLE voglio che la AI sia utilizzata seguendo le seguenti caratteristiche:
1. enabling human self-realisation, without devaluing human abilities
2. enhancing human agency, without removing human responsibility
3. cultivating social cohesion, without eroding human self-determination
rileggiti quel paper dai

# ICT e Human rights
Con ICT si intende:   **tecnologie dell'informazione e della comunicazione**
ICTs possono:
1. Interferire con gli *human rights*
2. Contribuire a proteggere/implementare gli *human rights*
# Gli human rights
1. Liberta' e dignita': ogni persona nasce libera e uguale in dignita' e diritti
2. Right to equality and nondiscrimination:  All are equal before the law and are entitled without any discrimination to equal protection of the law. All are entitled to equal protection against any discrimination …. and against any incitement to such discrimination
3. Right to privacy: no one shall be subjected to arbitrary interference with his privacy, family, home or correspondence, nor to attacks upon his honour and reputation. Everyone has the right to the protection of the law against such interference or attacks
4. Right to life, liberty and security
5. Right to property: Everyone has the right to own property alone as well as in association with others.
6. Freedom of assembly and association: Everyone has the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and association. No one may be compelled to belong to an association.
7. Right to an effective remedy (rimedio/risarcimento): Everyone has the right to an effective remedy by the competent national tribunals for acts violating the fundamental rights granted him by the constitution or by law
8. Right to a hearing (il diritto a essere ascoltato): Everyone is entitled in full equality to a fair and public hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal, in the determination of his rights and obligations and of any criminal charge against him
9. Presumption of innocence: Everyone charged with a penal offence has the right to be presumed innocent until proved guilty according to law in a public trial at which he has had all the guarantees necessary for his defence
10. Freedom of opinion, expression and information: Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers
11. Right to take part in government (partecipare al governo votando ad esempio): Everyone has the right to take part in the government of his country, directly or through freely chosen representatives. Everyone has the right to equal access to public service in his country. 
12. Right to social security: Everyone, as a member of society, has the right to social security and is entitled to realization of the economic, social and cultural rights indispensable for his dignity and the free development of his personality
13. Right to work: Everyone has the right to work, to free choice of employment, to just and favourable conditions of work and to protection against unemployment
14. Right to an adequate standard of living: Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and of his family and the right to security in the event of unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood, old age or other lack of livelihood in circumstances beyond his control
15. Right to education: Everyone has the right to education. Education shall be free, at least in the elementary and fundamental stages
16. Right to culture: Everyone has the right freely to participate in the cultural life of the community, to enjoy the arts and to share in scientific advancement and its benefits
Questi diritti umani sono una eredita' che dobbiamo custodire ma anche un PUNTO di inizio, una planimetria per vedere se la AI viola o meno questi sacrosanti diritti, per capire se stiamo andando o meno enlla giusta direzione con l'AI.

